AI Agents May Always Fall for Prompt Injections

arXiv:2605.17634v1 [cs.CR] 17 May 2026

Sahar Abdelnabi
ELLIS Institute Tübingen &
MPI-IS & Tübingen AI Center
sahar.abdelnabi@tue.ellis.eu

Eugene Bagdasarian
University of Massachusetts Amherst
eugene@umass.edu

§ prompt_injections_so_back

Abstract
Prompt injection is the most critical vulnerability in deployed AI agents. Despite
recent progress, we show that the prevailing defense paradigm (data-instruction
separation) both fails to detect attacks that operate through contextual manipulation
and degrades contextually appropriate behavior. We then recast prompt injection
via the lens of Contextual Integrity (CI), a privacy theory that judges information
flow compliance with contextual norms. This explains types of attacks that current
defenses attempt to patch and predict advanced ones future agents will face. We
develop unique benign and attack scenarios that force an agent to violate the norms
by (1) misrepresenting the flow, (2) manipulating norms, or (3) mixing multiple
flows. This reframing suggests an impossibility result: an adversary can always
construct a context under which a blocked flow appears legitimate, or a defender
who tightens norms will block genuinely legitimate flows. Our findings suggest
that current research addresses a shrinking fraction of future attack surfaces. Instead, through CI, we offer a principled framework for evaluating context-sensitive
failures, and designing CI-aware alignment for the frontier autonomous agents.

1

Introduction

In deployed AI systems, prompt injection [Greshake et al., 2023] ranks #1 in the OWASP Top 10
for LLM Applications [OWASP, 2025] and is the most critical vulnerability affecting production
systems, from coding agents to enterprise copilots [Johann Rehberger, 2025]. As LLM-agents become
more autonomous, working on long-running tasks with minimal human oversight [OpenClaw, 2026],
opportunities for adversaries to attack model’s context will only increase [Jeong et al., 2026]. Complex
scenarios might make maintaining balance between security and utility impossible.
The prevailing paradigm treats prompt injection as “instructions hidden in data”. We challenge this
framing and show that both attacks and legitimate interactions are more nuanced. For example, in a
received email that asks for a travel refund with the statement: “this request has been approved by the
department head” the problem is not an instruction, but whether the request was indeed legitimately
approved by the required party. Therefore, if a defense severs all dependence on external content (e.g.
using system-level isolation [Debenedetti et al., 2026]), it will suppress any actions even when the
claim is true, causing the agent to ignore a legitimate approval and degrading utility.
More fundamentally, agent’s operating context might contain instructions everywhere: any interaction
with a third-party or use of memory or skills are instructional by design [Gomaa et al., 2026,
Bagdasarian et al., 2024, Schmotz et al., 2026], so a defense cannot meaningfully separate data from
instructions without breaking the agentic workflows it is meant to protect.
In this paper, we argue that Contextual Integrity (CI) [Nissenbaum, 2004, 2009] offers the practical
lens for probing and grounding this broader class of failures. CI holds that the appropriateness of

